charm-seeder/README.md, before:

# Charm Seeder

"42 charms" project runs a collection of workflows/prompts to create and verify
charms.

## Setup requirements:

1. get an openai api key from https://platform.openai.com/api-keys
2. set it in your environment / toolshed

   export OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-proj-...

## Running the seeder

You can run the seeder on your local branch

local:

You will need to run the toolshed and jumble in other tabs, you will want to
have an `.env` file for toolshed with keys for LLMs and API/project setup for
phoenix.

    cd toolshed; deno task dev
    cd jumble; deno task dev-local

    TOOLSHED_API_URL=http://localhost:8000 deno task start --space blue42

staging:

    TOOLSHED_API_URL=https://toolshed.saga-castor.ts.net deno task start --space blue42

estuary:

    TOOLSHED_API_URL=https://estuary.saga-castor.ts.net deno task start --space blue42

## Adding more scenarios / prompts

You can add new flows to `scenarios.ts`.

## Reading the report

A report will be generated in the `report` directory named `report/blue42.html`.
You can open this in your browser to see the results.

Commit message:

Llm cache skip (#1048)
•	consistent cache plumbing from CLI → charm workflows → LLMSvc,
•	toolshed: ability to turn request/response logging off (DISABLE_LOG_REQ_RES),
•	charm-seeder: UX improvements (--tag, --name, --no-cache),
•	charm-seeder: codebase tidying (splitting jumble.ts, judge.ts, etc.).

---------

Co-authored-by: Jesse Andrews <anotherjesse@gmail.com>

charm-seeder/README.md, after:

# Charm Seeder

"42 charms" project runs a collection of workflows/prompts to create and verify
charms.

## Setup requirements:

1. get an openai api key from https://platform.openai.com/api-keys
2. set it in your environment / toolshed

   export OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-proj-...

## Running the seeder

You can run the seeder on your local branch

local:

You will need to run the toolshed and jumble in other tabs, you will want to
have an `.env` file for toolshed with keys for LLMs and API/project setup for
phoenix.

    cd toolshed; deno task dev
    cd jumble; deno task dev-local

    TOOLSHED_API_URL=http://localhost:8000 deno task start --name blue42

staging:

    TOOLSHED_API_URL=https://toolshed.saga-castor.ts.net deno task start --name blue42

estuary:

    TOOLSHED_API_URL=https://estuary.saga-castor.ts.net deno task start --name blue42

To run the seeder with a specific tag, use the `--tag` flag.

    deno task start --name blue42 --tag smol

To run the seeder with cache disabled, use the `--no-cache` flag.

    deno task start --name blue42 --no-cache

## Adding more scenarios / prompts

You can add new flows to `scenarios.ts`.

## Reading the report

A report will be generated in the `report` directory named `report/blue42.html`.
You can open this in your browser to see the results.
